Bulk inserts overhaul plus additional fixes and improvements (#274)
crate/crate-howtos: docs/performance/inserts/bulk.rst

.. highlight:: psql

.. _bulk-inserts:

============
Bulk inserts
============

If you have a lot of pre-existing data that you need to import in bulk, follow

> this how-to guide if you want to improve performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this how-to guide to get optimal performance on this task.
```

Author: I think I like my phrasing better, for conciseness

    :ref:`Insert performance: Methods <insert-methods>`

    :ref:`Best practices: Migrating from MySQL <migrating-mysql>`

    :ref:`Best practices: Migrating from MongoDB <migrating-mongodb>`

    `CrateDB Reference: Import and export`_

.. _bulk-configure-tables:

Configure your tables
=====================

.. _bulk-data-structure:

Data structure
--------------

Before starting the import, you need to carefully define your table structure
in CrateDB. Decisions made at this point will influence the import process
later.

For this example, say you have a single ``users`` table with six columns of
various types. You can create this table with the following statement::

    cr> CREATE TABLE users (
    ...   id INT primary key,
    ...   name TEXT,
    ...   day_joined TIMESTAMP,
    ...   bio TEXT INDEX using fulltext,
    ...   address OBJECT (dynamic) AS (
    ...     city TEXT,
    ...     country TEXT
    ...   )
    ... );
    CREATE OK, 1 row affected (... sec)

.. _bulk-shards-replicas:

Shards and replicas
-------------------

For each table, if you do not set the number of `shards`_ or the number of
`replicas`_, the default configuration is as follows:

**Shards**

>     Dependant on the number of data-nodes in the cluster (see `CLUSTERED
>     clause`_)

Reviewer: Not sure about this?
```suggestion
    Dependent on the number of data-nodes in the cluster (see `CLUSTERED
    clause`_).
```

**Replicas**
    One

You should choose the number of shards wisely. The choice depends on the number
of nodes in the cluster as well as on the amount of data that is going into the
table.

Assuming there are six nodes in the cluster, you can put two shards on each

> node, giving you a total of 12 shards. This should be enough to handle millions
> of records.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
node, giving you a total of 12 shards. This should be enough to store millions
of records efficiently.
```

Author: I think the less-specific "handle" here is preferable because sharding is not just about storage capacity, it's also about redundancy and performance

> Shards can be thought of as "virtual nodes." You should create enough for your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shards can be thought of as "virtual nodes". You should create enough for your
```

Author: this is incorrect. punctuation should be inside the quotes

https://www.grammarly.com/blog/quotation-marks/#:~:text=Do%20commas%20and%20periods%20go,go%20inside%2C%20sometimes%20stay%20outside.

Reviewer: Thanks for improving my English writing along the lines and sorry for the noise.

scaling needs, but use as few as possible to keep the resource overhead (e.g.,
file descriptors and memory) as small as possible.

When importing data, you should set the number of replicas to a minimum,
ideally zero. If the import fails, you can `drop`_ the table and import
again. When the import succeeds, adjust the number of replicas according to
your `availability`_ requirements.

For example, the ``CREATE TABLE`` statement we used before could be changed
to the following::

    cr> CREATE TABLE users(
    ...   id INT primary key,
    ...   name TEXT,
    ...   day_joined TIMESTAMP,
    ...   bio TEXT INDEX using fulltext,
    ...   address OBJECT (dynamic) AS (
    ...     city TEXT,
    ...     country TEXT
    ...   )
    ... ) CLUSTERED INTO 12 shards
    ... WITH (number_of_replicas = 0);
    CREATE OK, 1 row affected (... sec)

.. _bulk-refresh-interval:

Refresh interval
----------------

Another way to speed up importing is to set the `refresh_interval`_ of the
table to zero::

    cr> ALTER TABLE users SET (refresh_interval = 0);
    ALTER OK, -1 rows affected (... sec)

This will disable the periodic `refresh`_ of the table that is needed to

> minimize the effect of eventual consistency and also minimize the overhead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
minimize the effect of eventual consistency in order to minimize the overhead
```

Author: good catch. reworded slightly

during import.

.. HIDE:

    cr> DROP TABLE users;
    DROP OK, 1 row affected (... sec)

You can also set the refresh interval when initially creating the table, like
so::

    cr> CREATE TABLE users (
    ...   id INT primary key,
    ...   name TEXT,
    ...   day_joined TIMESTAMP,
    ...   bio TEXT INDEX using fulltext,
    ...   address OBJECT (dynamic) AS (
    ...     city TEXT,
    ...     country TEXT
    ...   )
    ... ) CLUSTERED INTO 12 shards
    ... WITH (
    ...   number_of_replicas = 0,
    ...   refresh_interval = 0
    ... );
    CREATE OK, 1 row affected (... sec)

When the import has finished, you can set the refresh interval back to a
reasonable value (milliseconds)::

    cr> ALTER TABLE users SET (refresh_interval = 1000);
    ALTER OK, -1 rows affected (... sec)

.. _bulk-import-data:

Import the data
===============

Once the table is created, you can start importing the data.

When importing, CrateDB has `native support for JSON data`_, where each line is

> a JSON string representing a single record. Empty lines are skipped. The keys

Reviewer: This format is called "JSON Lines" [1], in order to discriminate against regular JSON. Can you add this reference here in a good way?

> JSON Lines files may be saved with the file extension `.jsonl`.

[1] https://jsonlines.org/

of the JSON objects are mapped to columns when imported. Nonexistent columns
will be created if necessary.

> For example, a JSON file might look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a `.jsonl` file might look like this:
```

Author: opted to say "JSON Lines" hereo

> For example, a JSON file might look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a ``.jsonl`` file might look like this:
```

Author: used "JSON Line"

> For example, a JSON file might look like this:

Reviewer: For purposes of correctness, I would prefer this. However, if CrateDB does not grok importing from `.jsonl` files, i.e. if it does not consider it as a valid file extension, please just skip this suggestion.
```suggestion
For example, a ``.jsonl`` file might look like this:
```

Author: as above

.. code-block:: json

    {"id": 1, "name": "foo", "day_joined": 1408312800, "bio": "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetuer adipiscing elit.", "address": {"city": "Dornbirn", "country": "Austria"}}
    {"id": 2, "name": "bar", "day_joined": 1408312800, "bio": "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetuer adipiscing elit.", "address": {"city": "Berlin", "country": "Germany"}}

Use the `COPY FROM`_ statement to import JSON data directly from a file::

    cr> COPY users FROM '/tmp/best_practice_data/users.json';
    COPY OK, 150 rows affected (... sec)

> Here, CrateDB will check ``/tmp/best_practices_data/`` locally on each node in

Reviewer: I believe there have to be special considerations when referencing files on Windows file systems. Maybe it would be appropriate to add them below this section as an appropriate `.. TIP` admonition?

Split your tables into partitions
=================================

You can split your table into `partitions`_ to improve performance.

.. HIDE:

    cr> DROP TABLE users;
    DROP OK, 1 row affected (... sec)

Partitions can be created using the ``CREATE TABLE`` statement and a
``PARTITIONED BY`` clause to specify a partition column. For example::

    cr> CREATE TABLE users (
    ...   id INT primary key,
    ...   name TEXT,
    ...   day_joined TIMESTAMP primary key,
    ...   bio TEXT INDEX using fulltext,
    ...   address OBJECT (dynamic) AS (
    ...     city TEXT,
    ...     country TEXT
    ...   )
    ... ) CLUSTERED INTO 6 shards
    ... PARTITIONED BY (day_joined)
    ... WITH (number_of_replicas = 0);
    CREATE OK, 1 row affected (... sec)

.. NOTE::

    If a `primary key`_ was explicitly declared, the partition column has to be a
    component of the primary key.

A value identifying the target partition column *should* be defined in the
``COPY FROM`` statement using the ``PARTITION`` clause::

    cr> COPY users PARTITION (day_joined=1408312800)
    ... FROM '/tmp/best_practice_data/users_1408312800.json';
    COPY OK, 23 rows affected (... sec)

> When you use the ``PARTITION`` clause, CrateDB doesn't need to resolve the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the ``PARTITION`` clause, CrateDB doesn't need to resolve the
```

Author: disagree. the emphasis here is on the choice the user makes whether to use it or not use it

> partition for each row that is imported, which aids performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
partition for each row that is imported, which also improves performance.
```

Author: disagree. the "also" is incorrect because the only reason we're mentioning the previous clause is *because* it has an impact on performance

additionally, I considered using "improves" here, but I shied away from it because I think it's too-definitive a statement to make. "may improve performance", on the other hand, sounds too meek

I settled on "aids" because it strikes the middle ground of communicating that it "helps" performance even if it practically makes no difference

I didn't use "helps" because I don't feel like "which helps performance" strictly good grammar in this context because there is a verb missing (i.e., helps performance do WHAT?)

Here, notice the partition column itself (``day_joined``) has been excluded
from the JSON. You must omit this column if you use the ``PARTITIONED`` clause.

.. CAUTION::

    You *can* import data into partitioned tables without using the
    ``PARTITION`` clause, as long as you *do* specify the column value in the
    source file. However, we do not recommend this method, as doing so may
    degrade performance.

.. SEEALSO::

    `CrateDB Reference: Partitioned tables`_

    `CrateDB Reference: PARTITIONED BY`_

    `CrateDB Reference: Alter a partitioned table`_

.. _bulk-disable-refresh-new-shards:

Disable table refresh for new shards
------------------------------------

When importing data into a table that already has partitions, you can optimize
the insert operation for newly created shards by disabling the
`refresh_interval`_ for those partitions (only) using the `ALTER TABLE ONLY`_
statement.

.. SEEALSO::

    :ref:`Bulk inserts: Shards and replicas <bulk-shards-replicas>`

.. _bulk-increase-shards:

Increase the number of shards
-----------------------------

The ``ALTER TABLE`` clause can also be used to `alter the number of shards`_

> for newly created partitions, which may improve improve performance when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for newly created partitions, which may improve performance when
```

> handling a lot more data than before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
handling a lot more data than before, when the table was initially created
with a specific number of shards.
```

Author: slightly reworded
